Tom Davis
Design Rationale
May 2015

I wrote a story on student debt. How students are paying for school, why they’re choosing certain schools and what job prospects have a higher earning potential over others. It’s no surprise that undergraduate education is expensive but while speaking with students from various schools including, the Fashion Institute of Technology, CUNY Hunter College, Ramapo College of New Jersey and Columbia University – I began to gather that students are becoming wiser when making a college selection. Student debt numbers have been thrown at us for years and it’s always been a worry in the back of our minds. This story is a variation of what students paid to graduate with a Bachelors degree and the difference in the schools they would’ve like to attend but couldn’t afford. 

The online publication that our group chose to replicate was Quartz. The site is easy to navigate, clean and enables readers to have more than one choice of data that adds to its fuller picture. The colors scheme of Quartz includes pinks, purples and blues – similar to the Quartz crystal. So at first I wanted to use the colors of the schools I mentioned but it made more sense to emphasize the tuition prices more than the school colors. 

I took note early in the semester after reading, “Foundation for a Science of Data Visualization” and wanted to incorporate the four visualization stages when selecting data. I wanted it to be data that could be easily understood, especially to those that think with the right side of their brain (like me). For my final visualization, I chose to break down numbers for one of my sources who chose an in-state New Jersey College over New York University because of the price difference. I went through each colleges financial aid packages and broke down tuition, which included room and board, health insurance, facility fees and several other expenses that have to be paid in order to attend these colleges. 

For number display purposes, we learned in the beginning of the semester that graphs should always start at zero so I made to do that and work my way up. Because both of the schools that I chose to use within the visualization exceed 50,000 – that’s where I chose to proceed after zero. Quartz uses static images for their visualizations so I took out annotations and included the price directly in my bars. The color I chose is white because it stands out against the purple and pink without clashing or becoming difficult to see. The data I chose reflected my sources undergraduate experiences. Bridget Emslie chose Ramapo College of New Jersey for the in state tuition and in state aid granted to her. Though it wasn’t much and she still graduated with a little over $80,000, she borrowed nearly $150,000 less than she would have had she accepted enrollment in New York University’s nursing program.

It was important to me that I displayed numbers that haven’t necessarily been reported on through other publications. Using various school website, bursar office information and official college aid websites such as College Board and The Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 

Throughout the process I took note of Prof. McGregor’s advice to take the middle white space out because it’s distracting from the important information. Using less space for the chart. I knew that since I was using a bar graph and display 4-5 bars total for two different schools, it would be important to illustrate just what my story has to say. Emslie doesn’t speak for every student who chose an in-state school because of it’s tuition but I think her examples fit just how detrimental the lending system can be to a families finances. Students are thinking ahead of their education and finding schools with half the borrowing burden than others – even if it wasn’t their first choice. 
